Here we go.
Okay.
You see, I'll ask you a question, Bill Stolman, we're at the Shiny Library, and I always ask you how you describe the focus of the collection.
And I start by talking my way around the room with manuscripts and early printed books and human books, and then Bibles, it works.
And, I mean, you can see Bibles in a number of different languages.
I mean, you know, in...
Greek and that kind of thing.
And then we get into more Bibles, and then it moves quickly into Renaissance material, particularly Reformation and Luther.
And then there are funny kind of chunks.
There's a kind of reference chunk in there that I very rarely use.
You remember that, I mean, this was a library when his father had it, but it was out in Titusville that had no major reference library near it.
So there are kind of chunks of reference works that, if it had always been here, wouldn't be here.
They'd be in Princeton, and they'd just go next door to use them.
And then the next alcove is American.
These are called alcoves?
Yeah.
Go ahead, you can just talk, and I'm just going to take a few notes when I speak.
The next alcove is American, and that's where the early American printing is, and that's where the grant material is, the Civil War.
And then the next album is Further American, South America's work.
And then the second and last album is kind of great books in general sense.
That's where Locke and there's Tristan Shandy and Faust and that kind of thing.
These are first firsts, right?
Yeah.
You see, but there's a kind of funny, I mean, there's a lost cave with all the books.
I mean, there's the later editions of Bunyan and other works about Bunyan.
There's the thing that Einstein first appeared in, reporting on the, you know, theory of relativity.
You know, Smith and Locke and that kind of thing.
And then you get into, you know, something that's kind of ordinary.
The Dictionary of National Biography and books.
And then the final one tends to be Voyages of Discovery, with a particular emphasis on Mexico and America, and then you get into Mexico.
That's spectacular.
You would say the actual focus of the collection probably was Mr. Shady's father, not the grandfather.
I mean, it was his, the story that they've seen him probably write a couple of times was that his father came to Princeton and heard somewhere in a Western CIS class that the two events which, the two greatest events in the history of the world, which is one of those things only a professor and a first year Western CIS can say, was the discovery of America and the discovery of the printing press.
No, I suspect it was a class on, you know, 15th century or something.
Those were the two things, and so those were the things that he began thinking about, and how the two of them occurred, you know, within 50 years of one another, and what it was that people were doing in that class.
The family, what makes this all possible, of course, is Pennsylvania oil, is that right?
Did that continue through the generations, or did they diversify?
I'm not too sure.
I'm not sure either.
I mean, I... His father... This is not all that important, but I'm just... No, I mean, I think they must have diversified.
It certainly is out of his hands at this point.
I mean, in the sense that he has bankers and money managers in New York with whom he taught, I think, every day.
But, I mean... Ask him what he does professionally.
What would you say, investor?
No, he'd say he's a musicologist.
Really?
And this is how he is?
Yeah, I mean, he would say, I just did a CV for him, because somebody's been nominated for the membership in the American Philosophical Society.
I mean, I'll tell you, he would never tell you, you can't repeat it.
I mean, somebody wants money for something.
He graduated from Princeton in 36.
This is great because I don't want to waste his time.
He then, let me get the things I'll get you.
In 1940, he got a master's in music from Columbia.
And from 1940 to 42, he taught at Cornell in the music department there.
So his adding to the collection in those areas is a natural.
He's a natural as far as he, yeah.
And then, I mean, the TV goes 46 to 80, he was director of the Bach aria group.
So he would say he was a musicologist.
And there's no problem with my asking him that.
No, no.
I'm really looking for impressions, feelings, you know, what it's like to come in here.
This is his.
And that's why they go through that little funny song and dance where they renounce all of this.
I mean, they never actually came in without knocking.
Because, I mean, somehow they've worked out an arrangement with Prince's.
This is his library, and you're on private property.
Now, technically, you may not, but they have to.
It's like an embassy or something.
like the Vatican seal.
Exactly, exactly.
I mean, you don't, I mean, they all, the secretaries always, I told them to don't bother, just come on in.
I'm sure it's been etched.
But they always stop.
Tell me a little bit about yourself, Phil, how you've come to this position.
I was, I have a doctorate in medieval studies, and
did university administration for four years in Toronto, University of Toronto, at Victoria College, and then taught for a couple of years at the University of Windsor.
And, I mean, I was doing administration because the job market was tight.
Are you Canadian?
Yeah, I'm a Canadian citizen.
And I got this job teaching, a 10-year-old student job, and I bought a house, and I thought I was at the University of Windsor, and I thought I was there for that.
And then he called.
Did you know who he was?
Yeah, I know who he was.
I'd been down and used the library.
He wasn't here.
I didn't meet him on that occasion.
I met him at a Library of Congress in Poland on 15th century.
But he was looking for a librarian because Minor Bryant, who was here the whole life, except for some time at the Jefferson Bridge, and who had been hired by his father.
And he was really like an aunt to the children.
had died.
And then Janet Eames, who's been at Mills College, who was a librarian for almost two years, she was working here in Arthur Freeman, who works at Quaritch in London, but is an American.
She and Arthur got married, so she moved to London.
And he was looking for it.
And he said, you know, what I'd be interested.
And I said, well,
I didn't think that I was really what I wanted.
First of all, I was a Canadian.
I wasn't a librarian.
I had a 10-year-old dream job, and that's why I sent my computer, and he worked something out.
I was very, very happy.
It'll be two years in July.
It must be, if you love the book.
Oh, it's wonderful.
It's wonderful.
I mean, there's no castle.
You're working for a very beautiful...
I mean, it has it.
Everything does.
I mean, you know, you work for one person, that's who you report to.
If that one person's feeling grumpy, you have to put up with it.
I mean, it has its advantage.
I mean, I don't go to meetings, which is one of the biggest advantages.
I mean, I enjoyed teaching, but I enjoyed research.
You could teach a couple of courses here.
Oh, then, yeah, I taught at night school here.
I should think that
Well, yeah, but this is Princeton, and they don't have to rush into anything too soon, so I'm sort of... How does this collection support scholarship?
I think that's kind of the stipulation, right?
Princeton agrees to this.
I'm sure they agreed to it for the long term as well.
However, I think they did say that...
the research.
Is that right?
How does it support the scholarship?
I mean, it's open to anybody with proper deliberation.
The way that Princeton read books is open to anybody with proper deliberation.
I mean, I had a student here this morning from Westminster Choir College, who's a student conducting the music.
He wanted to look at
And, you know, she registered as a reader with Princeton, and that's fine.
And we let them in, and we look at them.
The material stays here.
The material stays here, or sometimes if I'm running around, I give it to Princeton, and they have a reading room, and somebody who watches the reading will keep traffic, but it counts the pages that go in, and counts the pages that go out.
So it's much easier for me if I don't have to stay here and watch them.
Do you ever discuss, I'll ask them,
What's the future of the Shaggy collection?
I mean, is this something that you're privy to?
I know he has a daughter.
He has two daughters and a son.
I mean, I don't know what he'll tell you.
I mean, obviously it's... Yeah, I mean, what he'll tell you is that maybe none of your business is going to answer that, but it'll go to Princeton.
if his will stays the way it is.
And the reason I would want to ask that question, certainly he must be mindful of exactly, it is, if it's not unique, the collection is three generations, but then I get this, I think, estate, and I'm sure Princeton has made all the necessaries
assurances that it would be made as a shiny collection.
It has for 25 years.
I mean, it's no small expense on Princeton's part.
I mean, he pays my salary, but they, you know, past support services are no small.
Well, considering what they're getting, I suppose.
But, I mean, you know, 25 years is a long time.
Have you ever heard of such a new agent like this?
Well, Princeton's done it before.
You could talk to Bill Joyce or somebody.
There's a man named Robert Taylor, who you may have heard of, and the Taylor Library is here in Princeton, in another part of their books.
And Bob Taylor is particularly interested in English literature, moving, I think, more towards Victorian, but a big collection of Max Beerbund,
and that kind of thing.
And he had his library.
I mean, there's a shitey room.
There's a tailor room, and he felt it.
And had a librarian who he paid, who worked here at New York before.
And when he died, it became a tailor collection.
I mean, it's only a local thing, but it's a library while the person is alive, and that becomes a collection.
when they're done.
But they, I mean, they still make, Taylor left money, and so they still make acquisitions.
I was at the Morgan, I spent a couple hours at the Morgan yesterday, and I bought the Heinemann Collection, and it is, it does continue similarly as the Heinemann Collection, which they
And that's very rich in music, by the way.
I had not even heard of that collection before.
I went to the illuminated manuscript.
Oh yeah, the dust, that was just amazing.
And the Morgan had those boxes up there, which are the envy of half the people in the museum world.
That's right.
And those are expensive to do, because they'd screw up this little wall, and then they'd take them off, and you'd fill the holes, and you'd paint or re-paper.
But it does, as much, because the light's coming at you,
It's almost like stained glass.
Yeah, it's like stained glass.
It's a hell of those things.
I've interviewed one of the, the person who owns one of the manuscripts, Arthur Bruch-Boward, you know, have you ever heard about him?
He and his wife are private collectors, and he's very quiet.
I'm the first person they've ever talked to.
He's the president of the Boston Athenaeum, his wife is president of the Friends of Holden Library, so that's very well-connected.
And I'm sharing with Mr. Shady Wilson.
I know him.
But they have a very small collection, 1,000, 1,500, but... Yeah, oh yeah.
That, I would think, the majority of people.
who are collectors would be, I mean, it tends to be a manageable kind of side that you know.
I mean, you also get, it seems, some fairly particular interests.
I mean, there are very few people that collect on any kind of wide range.
I think it's best to guess instead of part of sources.
Yes, I mean, you get to know what makes something special.
A series of collections.
Yeah.
you know, Princeton has the Junius Morgan collection of Virgil, and the so-and-so, the Patterson collection of Horvath, and somebody's collection of Ernest Hemingway, and somebody's, you know, they tend to just, having, I think, there's something about book collectors, having spent the time focusing on that material, getting it all together, and having made notes and records of how it all relates.
And getting the best copies.
And getting the best copies available, then to say,
You know, I don't care what happens to it.
Let's have a big auction and let it be dispersed again.
Well, some say that.
Some say that.
I mean, that's what Bradley Martin said.
Bradley Martin said it.
And there's a famous quote by Robert Hull, who was one of the fonds.
I have the catalog of it.
It's Beverly Chew closing in the introduction.
Yeah.
If it weren't for collectors, where would I have gotten that?
And I want to return it so other collectors could have the fun that I had or something along those lines.
But that's a fairly rare...
I mean, most people kind of see it as some kind of monument or something that they've worked on and they want it to remain intact.
Well, if it's a really exceptional collection, as this is, that is not likely to be replicated.
No, no.
That's the problem.
But, I mean, that's why when you mentioned this collector in Newton, you know, that they have a kind of small choice.
I was at their houses a couple of weeks ago and took out this
Book of Hours.
It was beautiful, and it illuminated stuff.
And he said, but no, he said, read the inscription.
Well, it was, pray for me as I pray for you.
It was an inscribed, an inscribed Book of Hours from Henry VIII to a woman named Margaret Cole, who I believe, I'm not sure later, was beheaded.
Well, Cole certainly was one of the archbishops of Canada.
I mean, there was a Jewish family.
Yeah, and this was a script.
I'm holding it.
That's really quite extraordinary.
Well, we couldn't afford it today, I'm sure.
You know, that's what most people say.
Prices have gotten so high.
And that's why, I mean, Mr. Scheide alone couldn't have done it today.
I mean, he relies on his grandfather, in particular on his father.
And that's why people collect
kind of less broadly than practice.
Or they, you know, they tend to collect, you know, not the original material, but, you know, not manuscript material, but first editions.
Or they collect modern authors, assuming that a hundred years from now.
Sure.
Now, are you bitten by the collecting bug at all?
No.
I just seem to find that they're the professionals who work
I can't understand this stuff.
No, I mean, I am, in a sense, I mean, I want to acquire things for the Shady Library, but not for myself.
I mean, I'm interested in books as historical objects, but in a sense, once I know about it, it doesn't make any difference to me where it is.
Are you working actively in... Yeah.
...perspective... Yeah, I mean, we just thought of...
of an interesting manuscript in a book.
Manuscripts that were written and then used as printer's copy.
So we bought a copy of the book with the manuscript.
There were about 15 of those.
Yeah, I mean, it's great.
That's the exciting thing.
I mean, that's a whole new aspect of it.
What is the portal name of this room?
Does it have a portal name?
No, it's called The Shady Library.
It's called The Shady Library.
Your access is from the library.
And there's also that door there, which goes to the other side, so that I come in on the weekends and Saturdays.
Because, of course, it's all alarmed, both there and there.
It's very safe here, too, I would imagine.
It is in a night wave.
It's beautiful.
And at a certain stage, it just gets too valuable or too important to keep in your home.
And that's when you have to kind of move to an institution.
Supposedly, that's what Jerome Kerns said.
He said, we can't go out.
We have to hire guards.
I think he also knew that the crash was coming, too, wasn't he?
He also sold all his stock.
You know, John Craig had the big auction.
I have a chapter that starts with the whole and ends with the current.
The Golden Age started somewhat before that, but I'm able actually to bring, even though I'm starting in 1911, I'll have Morgan and Huntington and Folger and Widener and Rosenbach, all of this place, you know, at the current auction.
The whole auction.
That's really when Huntington became known.
He really wasn't known as a collector until then.
And those books by Leslie Morris, the two Rosenbach's exhibition, I just realized that, I mean, Rosenbach couldn't have existed without Huntington.
No.
If I buy all this, I could sell a third of it and recover more than my cost from Huntington, and the rest if I had to put in the stock.
Well, Rosenblatt was kind of lucky.
He had Huntington, and he also had Smith dying at an expectantly young age.
I mean, because he basically, he actually, they have letters.
He wrote people like Huntington, well, I'm awfully sorry about George D. Smith dying, but I'm here, and I'm certainly available to help you and to serve you.
They're letting Wesley Morris, I've been to the Rosenbachs, and Fleming had a lot of correspondence up in New York that Ed Wolff didn't have access to, and he did his Rosenbach biography.
Where is that now?
At the Rosenbach Mall in Philadelphia.
When Fleming acquired Rosenbach after they died, Philip and his brother,
those files were with him in New York.
Now since Fleming died just recently, like over the last two years, all that stuff came out of Philly.
And there are some very interesting pieces of correspondence in there.
But I mean, you know, just the way those two exhibitions talk about Rosenbach kind of motoring around, this last one motoring around England and Ireland.
going in on the land of Jennifer, who he knew were in kind of financial difficulties.
I think Leslie mentioned that a lot of that exhibit is basically stuff that they just did get from funding.
And she actually has catalogued the whole way around.
Yeah, I mean, they got a grant to do that.
That's right.
She and Ellen Dunlap.
Yeah, they're part of it.
Ellen was at Texas.
Manuscripts in the 70s.
strengths are in what areas would you say?
Would be in biblical material.
There's a kind of mixture.
I mean, there are a number of books of ours.
The books of ours, anybody who starts collecting medieval manuscript starts with books of ours.
I mean, Christopher de Hamel has one kind of standard sale a year in December.
90% of that is books of ours.
Somebody like Bob Taylor, who had
12 manuscripts.
One of them was a book.
Because they're visually appealing, and then the media is visually appealing.
But you tend to move on into other things.
So this is it.
What are these little artifacts?
Well, those were collected by his father.
His father, I mean, you kind of branch out into other areas, and those are...
things which demonstrate the history of writing.
You have a number of, kind of, most rare book ones have non-book objects and they're kind of there because they're interesting.
People, you know, I think if they're left over from the days in the library in the house
If you want to have access, you go into the library after dinner.
You look at a few things.
After a while, people kind of glaze over when you bring out another book.
But if you're the kind of object, it's related.
The family that's now here in Princeton.
Mr. and Mrs. Scheide, the children live.
Well, they all live on the East Coast.
One lives in Washington, outside Washington.
One lives in Cambridge.
Yeah, and isn't she going to Philadelphia, is married to someone who makes it to free that?
Yeah, Gordon Marshall.
Okay, well, I'm certainly talking with Mr. Scheide now, and this really extraordinary collection that you have here.
And how does one start?
I guess...
There aren't many people who are really born to books, I guess.
Maybe we could... This is a collection that's a legacy as much as it is a collection.
You've seen the portraits on the wall.
I've seen the portraits on the wall.
And I just wonder... It has been said that books or book collecting is not something that's inherited.
I wonder if you'd address yourself to that.
I don't know.
Maybe we could just start it there and then... I wouldn't have done it by myself, I guess.
I wouldn't have taken a chance at what?
Well, I wouldn't have done it by myself.
I wouldn't have taken a chance at things being as they were.
I guess what I'm interested in is
From your earliest recollections must have been that books were very important and that the collection was a central element.
I wonder if you could talk at all about how your collecting has differed from that of your father and how his collection differed from his father.
What focus you brought to the collection?
Well, mine's a very simple one.
I got a little bit of music.
But aside from that, I hated the collection more as the way it was, adding to the things that were already here.
It's the same kind of thing.
For example, standard manuscripts and American things, which are really important things that are already going strong in the Protestant.
go back to my grandfather's events.
So music would be really in a new direction, such as it is.
I don't think it's a small section of the library.
That's the most important autograph you can find out of your life.
When we exhibit things, when we have a class,
college college college college college college college college college college college college college college college college college college college college college college college college college college college college college college college college college college college
Bill was an old little English fellow, and so this binding was done at the Morgan Library about 30 or 35 years ago when it was assimilated.
But it's the only Anglo-Saxon book in this hemisphere.
Look at that.
But if you come forward, it's easier to go to the table, really.
No, is this something that you acquired, sir, or is this... My father, about 50 years ago.
Better sit over here.
Okay.
Let's see.
This better.
Oh, my God, look at this.
All right.
Now, this is a bit of evil stuff, and it's set in the city of Lincoln for a number of centuries in the city hall.
And Emmer Waterhouse signed it in several places, and the principal, Kilroy, who was here, was a fellow named George Davey, yes, Miesbauer, and this fellow here, 1607.
He used to sit there and not have anything to do, and he had just signed the names in his book.
There he is again.
There's George Davey in 1604.
Shakespeare probably writing King Lear or something.
And he had anything better to do than that.
And then here are a few pages from probably the New Testament.
George Davie again, you see, he was very active in 1604.
Flourished, shall we say.
And these are a few pages from a few stories from the New Testament that somebody said, if you have that much of the Bible there, then
the mayor and the sheriff and everybody else can lay their hands on it and say, I will have faith to execute this office, and swear to do so, and it'll take, it'll be okay, it'll be valid.
It's called an Oath Gospels.
Uh-huh.
That's what it's called, the whole book, is that what you'd call it?
I'm sorry.
Well, those few pages are enough to make it an Oath Gospels.
I get it.
And the casuistry, then in fashion.
There's this stuff.
Is this a repair here?
Yes, I think it is a repair.
Then, after the Oath Gospels, there is some ordinances, medieval ordinances.
One, I think about prohibiting pigs running around town.
And my father was trying to find some of that stuff, I remember.
And then you go right into the middle of the Anglo-Saxon.
And it gets better, more distinct, quite quickly.
But the margins are often quite full, like that one.
Some of them are not, like that one.
But the margins, when they have things in them, like they do there,
are mostly officials of the city of Lincoln, England.
So this is quite a valuable book for the history of that town.
How old is it, would you say, sir?
Well, it must be about a thousand years old now, I would think.
And you think, Bill?
Yeah, the Anglo-Faxon Corps has written about the year 1000.
And it's a bunch of sermons and... A thousand-year-old book.
English book.
I really hate it.
Proto-English.
and um what is the material of the uh is that vellum yes but it's been rebound and there are bad things have happened to it and you can see uh up here like that you see just all you see are descenders and uh and there was a fellow working on this here some years ago who since died who um
Some of these sermons where this happened, there were Latin texts known.
So he would correlate this down here with the Latin, say, and he'd correlate that with the Latin, and he'd know what the Latin was for this line.
Oh, I see.
But then the problem would be to translate the Latin to that line into Anglo-Saxon with the descenders in the right places.
That's an interesting problem.
Yes, there certainly is.
Which I do not find myself equipped to do.
How much do you think was trimmed?
One line.
Let's settle for one line.
Yeah, I think that's enough.
That's what he estimated, I think.
See, when it was rebound, it wouldn't have, Morgan wouldn't have retrimmed it.
No, it had been retrimmed earlier.
See, and there's the fact, similar.
And that's why it was disbound, so if they couldn't.
It was a good come on.
What do we want to show?
We want to show there.
I see.
I don't know if it's Sir Winston S. Churchill.
There was a series that was begun at the end of the Second World War when they realized that things could be lost.
And, of course, this is already—it sneaked out in the 30s before they clamped down.
Did you know how your father managed to acquire it?
Yes, I know how he got it.
The Earl of Lothian, Marcus of Lothian, sold it to a fellow named Cotland Bishop in 1932.
And I thought I got it at the Cortland Bishop's Sale.
I have the catalogs for the Bishop's Sale.
So that'll be in there.
It should be in there in 1938, about.
Cortland Bishop's Sale.
There are the Bwickling Homilies, and then the Bwickling Psalter is in the Morgan Library.
But the Bwickling Psalter is in Latin.
It's mainly a Latin book with Anglo-Saxon interpolations here and there.
But this is a solid Anglo-Saxon book.
And one passage in it that one scholar thought that it may have some relation to Beowulf,
and so on.
There are little biblical passages in it and on also.
How often do you have occasion to enjoy it the way you're enjoying it now?
Well, I feel like it.
I'm more apt to catch the bug when someone else is around.
Like yourself, for example.
I'm so tired, to be honest with you.
There's nothing much of this type of thing.
It's as good as any page, I guess.
What do you feel when you hold something like this?
I feel very honored to be able to do so, that's all.
It's a very unusual privilege, no question about that.
I would have to say that that's as extraordinary a document as your Gutenberg Bible, maybe even in some respects more so.
In some respects more so, especially in an English-speaking area.
Yes, I think so.
There's only one of these.
That's the point.
I mean, the Gutenberg Bible, as significant as it is... As Hans Krauss used to say when he didn't have it.
It's a very common book.
But when he had it, he says, I had the book of books.
It depends on the point of view, you see.
Edward Wolfe, who I interviewed a couple weeks ago, has described this as the finest, you know, we are, the three of us who are sitting among what he said, is without question the finest
private library in the United States, and perhaps one of the finest in the world.
Yeah, I would rank pretty good.
In the United States, anyway.
Edwin said without question, and he said to say hello.
Oh, yes.
A lovely man.
He's a lot of fun.
I'm sure he would encourage you and your researches.
He's fascinating.
He told me about the time he
went out to Widener's house, and he said, boy, the times have changed.
He said, I took the Gutenberg Bible and put it in the passenger's seat and drove it.
Now as you create it, you insure it.
It's all kinds of, I don't know.
But I think to say that was kind of the beginning of a question, though, where, starting with a statement, this is said by any member of authorities to be the finest private library
the united states and yet it's perhaps five thousand items and i think less less is it fewer than five thousand i used to think around three years i can't imagine i've added a thousand it's somewhere in there don't you think three or four yeah i mean i was never actually kind of depends it's always how you count the items you count
know each one of the kings in an autograph so you can't say then that this is uh you know bibliomaniac oh no no in any way it's a very very focused and selective he's not um they used to call sir thomas phillips a velo maniac development no i'm not sir thomas neither of us none of us were uh yeah we'll show him the witness for it now uh there was a
I think there was a Wycliffe New Testament in New York, but here there is something more important, namely the only Wycliffe Bible in this hemisphere, a complete one.
And Belle de Costa Greene was very angry that her pal couldn't get it.
Did you ever kind of go head-to-head with B.G., as they call her?
Well, I knew her.
My father knew her better.
He took me to see her.
He says this.
That Bible I found in my dear father, Sir Will Morley's study, which book I believe was his great-grandfather, Mr. T. Morley, M. Darby, Mary, the Countess of Darby, 1717, and that's when she found that.
Then somebody here in the Elizabethan Times said, look at this, this is the Bible complete in English.
And then another fellow, this is my wife's book, T. Palmer.
and he was about 1730s, and he's probably the fellow who had this binding put on.
Now, there was a Norwegian lady here some years ago who was working on this prologue, and she was a Middle English scholar from the University of Trondheim, and a big friend of the librarian here at the time, Anna Bryan, and she had chosen this copy as a source for
working on the preface.
And the preface is a funny preface.
The author swears, even.
He says, some place here now, wait a minute, there.
He mentions how the Bible had been translated into Latin and how dangerous it was and how nasty he was thought of being for translated into English.
And he says, Lord God, that at the beginning of faith so many men translated into Latin, the great prophet of Latin men,
Let one simple creature of God translate into English for the benefit of Englishmen.
So on and so on.
You know what impresses me, not only what you're reading to me, but the fact that every book, every item here, you've been able to open almost like the magician deals as cards.
You know precisely what page you want to read to me.
Well, that's right at the end of it.
Yeah, but I mean, you know, what I'm saying is, this is a, you are a collector who knows this collection.
You have a card catalog over there, but you never use it.
Only now and then.
I mean, is it fair to say that you know this collection thoroughly, that not only what is here?
I know several books in it, but there are plenty that I can learn about.
That's all right.
There's something I can learn about.
What book don't I know about?
It's just easier when you're here to talk about those that I don't.
It's more fun.
Now here's, for example, the family that own this book.
And let the record show we've jumped to the very end of this very large-sized book here.
Well, it isn't very large-sized.
It's large enough to be a Bible.
if the hearer of these words has ever heard of the word Bible, the family of Mary and the family of Boyer.
And here our dear friend Nicholas Barker contributed a grain of useful, interesting information.
He said, you know, I go to the public record office and go to a lot of doctors.
I'll keep an eye out for this name, Mary.
And he did.
And he found a reference to a fellow named Mary
who was gone to legal trouble in the late 14th century for such thing to burn down a monastery.
So he'd be a Lollard, you see.
Well, is that an unusual surname?
I don't know.
But that fellow was a Lollard, and this is a Lollard book, and it's owned by a family named Mary.
And that's how it was spelling Mary, M-A-R-Y, right?
Yeah, and that was the same way in that public record office thing.
That's about, look at this, 1586.
And the book came in this family, and a married daughter married a guy named Thomas, in the Boyer family, so it goes over here, so you get the Boyers.
And then it says here, in, talk about the book, and in Bloody Mary's time, he says, oh yeah, in those superstitious times, can you see it down there, superstitious times?
was kept in hugger-mugger, which is a word that Claudius uses in Hamlet to talk about Colonius's body.
He did him wrong in hugger-mugger to incur him.
And there it's written in the contemporary of Shakespeare.
It was kept in hugger-mugger.
Look that up in my concordance to Shakespeare.
Look it up in Hamlet.
That's H-U-G-G-E-R, right?
Hugger-mugger.
Hugger-mugger, yes.
That's probably one of the words that credits Shakespeare with inventing, and he probably didn't.
It's in that scene around Act IV or so, where Laertes comes back and tries to start a rebellion.
Remember that scene, more or less?
And what's his name?
Claudius and his wife, or queen, are talking about it.
Gertrude.
Yeah.
They're talking about it, and there's a remark that he makes to her in that dialogue.
So there it is.
Hugger-mugger.
Yeah, hugger-mugger.
But now he's going to, he's going to, now he resolves to keep this book and so forth.
And then he goes on and has a great time about Queen Elizabeth here.
It's a small thing.
Yeah, Lady, Queen, and all, and all die before the sorrowful days of England shall come if God should take her.
take her from us, I think, before the end of the world.
And if for our sins she should die, I suppose, I can't remember all these words, but whether something of God, that I pray God or something, that he will grant me the grace to die at her feet before her.
That's what this guy wants to do.
She's going to die sometime.
He wants to die at her feet before.
Actually, she'd be a little bit surprised.
Die at her feet before.
And the last days, well, anyway, he put an everlasting life.
Amen, amen.
He's in a great state.
I just think a scholar would find some very interesting material in there about
temporary life.
Sure.
It's one of the important books.
I mean, there's a whole, there was a kind of myth going, that Lollards were kind of an underground group, and therefore the manuscripts which they produced therefore ought to be kind of homemade products.
I see.
Well, you just look at that,
And you know that isn't a homemade product.
That, for sure.
Well, it's no really fancy one, but it's an incredible job.
It's an incredible job.
And they all look the same.
I mean, all kind of... Some of them are pretty fibery.
They're very much fancier ones.
Not much, though.
Oh, yes.
It's a much bigger book.
Look at those.
Those are almost illuminations there, aren't they?
The Kenworth.
I saw the show yesterday at the Morgan, by the way, on the Dutch manuscripts.
Imaginary, lovely.
It's quite beautiful.
The Times has been doing it this week until Sunday.
They're going to do it on Sunday?
Yeah.
All right, I'll have an eye for it.
We'll go up and take a look next week.
It's really quite wonderful.
Yeah, these letters.
Some of these Sauter ones.
These are the Psalms, you see, the Sauter, he says.
This is something your father acquired?
Yeah.
How old were you when you became aware of the contents of this book?
Oh, I remember more as when it came, I guess, in 1931.
Did you always share the same enthusiasm for the books that your father did?
No, he sort of took them for granted.
I mean, but at what point did you realize that this was a generational legacy?
I mean, it was almost a responsibility to this extraordinary collection.
Yeah, it was part of the atmosphere I grew up in.
I knew nothing about that.
There's, for example, the Competentian Polyglot up there.
It isn't everybody that has that right under his playroom.
Now, which did we say that was?
Competentian Polyglot?
Oh, that's a—think of Steve Wiseman, who runs Simony's bookshop.
That's the fellow that published his thing.
Okay.
And—I mean, you remember— You don't have to get it out, but— You remember the books coming to the house.
Well, I don't remember that book.
No, but I remember this book.
I remember the Gutenberg Bible, Big Bucks, by Dr. Rosenbach.
Really?
Earlier in 1924.
Well, there you get an idea.
But that is a unique one.
You can't see that anywhere else in this country.
Speaking of Rosenbach, when I was talking to Ed Wolff, I never thought I'd hear him say that he actually thought that when it came to knowledge of books that Klaus was just
superior to Rosenbach in terms of knowledge of books.
And this is both.
Rosenbach, on the other hand, was more of a friend, you know, more of a hardy good fellow.
He said when it actually came to knowledge of books, I wonder if you'd have any thoughts on either of those two.
Well, Ed would have known Rosenbach very much better than I. I only saw him very occasionally as a boy or a young person and worked with him and was educated by him.
I couldn't believe it, but I certainly couldn't argue with that point.
It's very interesting you never said that.
Well, Hanson will get mixed up now and then.
Show me the thing we want to have a facsimile of.
And this is a really interesting story.
And if we can ever get
and Hope Mayo to do the job.
And now this is, there is a, there is a, um, this is a papal bull printed in Mainz in probably late 1456, and this is a Latin copy.
There is a German copy of it, and printed in the same type, probably about the same time, in Berlin.
But this is the only printed version, contemporary printed version, in Latin, you see.
And this is the earlier Gutenberg type, the 36-line size.
And there's probably more 36-line type in this room than there is anywhere else in this country.
And most of it's here.
Well, the 42 is first, right?
You need to do the 42 and then...
Well.
We don't know that.
Okay.
The 42 was used for the first big book.
First, first book.
Which comes first, though?
This, the other, the 42 comes first, right?
No?
Before the, for the, the, the Bible, there's a prehistory.
It's speculated.
My guess is that this is earlier.
That this is on the, on the road to, um, they kept reducing the size, I think.
Hmm.
It does stretch credulity to think that printing emerges full-blown with the 42-line Bible.
That's too much for me.
And this type, now there are all kinds of funny pieces of type here.
Let me see if I can find one of my favorite pieces.
It's beautiful though, isn't it?
Well, there's some nice letters in here.
Where's he, when he talks, look at that, look at that tree there, how that's well-eat.
That boy we're talking about, actually, instead of tree, right?
Look at the bell ringing, you see.
Isn't that wonderful?
Una campana sonorosa.
The Pope wants bells ringing very sonorously.
What do we call this?
Calixtus Bull, we'll call it.
What's the Pope calling this?
Bull on a turk, see.
There comes Calixtus, a bishop.
C-A-L-I.
Well, he spells it there with an S. It's sometimes spelled with an X. Either will pass.
Okay.
We want to be accurate.
Yes.
Now, this is something, again, that your father... Yes, yes.
And Mr. Krause has had various attitudes about this book.
You see there, it's been taken out of something.
Can you see that?
And my father got it in 39, and...
I talked to Krause about this, and he knew about the sale.
It was a sale in Prague, I think.
I forget the name of the nobleman who was having no more at that time.
But Krause said, oh, one time he said,
Oh, I was a young fellow.
I didn't know anything.
I had this bread in my possession.
I didn't know what I had.
He's crying a little bit, right?
Oh, yes.
Another time, he didn't admit that and didn't think it was he at all.
But somebody took it from there and got it to Mag somehow or other, and my father could never get to the bottom of it.
Is that completed?
Yes.
That's not a leaf or anything?
No, see, there's an end of it.
There's the beginning of it.
There's the end of it.
So how many pages?
Well, I numbered them one time as 10A, 10B.
So there would be 20 pages, rather small pages.
And I'm trying to find a particular page.
You can tell particular pieces of type.
This U, for example, has a gap in a certain place, and another U that has it in a different injury in another place.
And that's my favorite—well, I guess this is the place.
There's a—and that T, that was a—that crops up lots of places.
That almost looks like it's been filled in, doesn't it?
Where?
I wonder.
What's been filled in?
It doesn't, but I mean, it looks like maybe they went over it, or do you think— No, it's bad inking there.
It's bad inking there.
Yeah.
But you see—look at this.
You see the watermark right there without any trouble at all.
Indeed.
Great impression.
Now here, you see there's a T with a very wide crossbar.
Very different than that T there, for example.
Very narrow crossbar.
Has there been a study of the type made?
Is it Kusenberg's type?
Oh, no, no.
Paul Needham's been over every single letter in this.
This O is also unique, I think, to this room.
There's a hole down there.
Wow!
I'm going to write that one down.
Well, I don't know.
I said the Anglo-Saxon also.
Yeah.
Well, there may be another one of it.
That might be the title of this chapter, by the way.
Yes.
I'm just trying to speak a little bit.